README.md, before:

# AtomicRingBuffer
 
[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/eun-ice/atomicring.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/eun-ice/atomicring)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT%2FApache--2.0-blue.svg)](https://github.com/eun-ice/atomicring)
[![Cargo](https://img.shields.io/crates/v/atomicring.svg)](https://crates.io/crates/atomicring)
[![Documentation](https://docs.rs/atomicring/badge.svg)](https://docs.rs/atomicring)

A constant-size almost lock-free ring buffer
 
 Upsides

 - fast, try_push and pop are O(1)
 - scales well even during heavy concurrency
 - only 4 words of memory overhead
 - no memory allocations after initial creation
 
 
 Downsides

 - growing/shrinking is not supported
 - no blocking poll support
 - only efficient on 64bit architectures (uses a Mutex on non-64bit architectures) 
 - maximum capacity of 65535 entries
 - capacity is rounded up to the next power of 2

 ## Implementation details

 This implementation uses a 64 Bit atomic to store the entire state

```Text
 +63----56+55----48+47------------32+31----24+23----16+15-------------0+
 | w_done | w_pend |  write_index   | r_done | r_pend |   read_index   |
 +--------+--------+----------------+--------+--------+----------------+
```

- write_index/read_index (16bit): current read/write position in the ring buffer (head and tail).
- r_pend/w_pend (8bit): number of pending concurrent read/writes
- r_done/w_done (8bit): number of completed read/writes.

 For reading r_pend is incremented first, then the content of the ring buffer is read from memory.
 After reading is done r_done is incremented. read_index is only incremented if r_done is equal to r_pend.

 For writing first w_pend is incremented, then the content of the ring buffer is updated.
 After writing w_done is incremented. If w_done is equal to w_pend then both are set to 0 and write_index is incremented.

 In rare cases this can result in a race where multiple threads increment r_pend in turn and r_done never quite reaches r_pend.
 If r_pend == 255 or w_pend == 255 a spinloop waits it to be <255 to continue. This rarely happens in practice, that's why this is called almost lock-free.



## Dependencies

This package has no dependencies

## Usage

To use AtomicRingBuffer, add this to your `Cargo.toml`:

```toml
[dependencies]
atomicring = "0.2.0"
```


And something like this to your code

 ```rust
 
 // create an AtomicRingBuffer with capacity of 1024 elements 
 let ring = ::atomicring::AtomicRingBuffer::new(900);

// try_pop removes an element of the buffer and returns None if the buffer is empty
 assert_eq!(None, ring.try_pop());
 // push_overwrite adds an element to the buffer, overwriting the oldest element if the buffer is full: 
 ring.push_overwrite(1);
 assert_eq!(Some(1), ring.try_pop());
 assert_eq!(None, ring.try_pop());
 ```


## License

Licensed under the terms of MIT license and the Apache License (Version 2.0).

See [LICENSE-MIT](LICENSE-MIT) and [LICENSE-APACHE](LICENSE-APACHE) for details.

Commit message:

Version 0.3.0: interface change new -> with_capacity, fixing Drop, reducing memory overhead and benching against MPMC

README.md, after:

# AtomicRingBuffer
 
[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/eun-ice/atomicring.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/eun-ice/atomicring)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT%2FApache--2.0-blue.svg)](https://github.com/eun-ice/atomicring)
[![Cargo](https://img.shields.io/crates/v/atomicring.svg)](https://crates.io/crates/atomicring)
[![Documentation](https://docs.rs/atomicring/badge.svg)](https://docs.rs/atomicring)

A constant-size almost lock-free concurrent ring buffer for 64bit platforms
 
 Upsides

 - fast, try_push and pop are O(1)
 - scales well even during heavy concurrency
 - only 5 words of memory overhead
 - no memory allocations after initial creation
 
 
 Downsides

 - growing/shrinking is not supported
 - no blocking poll support
 - only efficient on 64bit architectures (uses a Mutex on non-64bit architectures) 
 - maximum capacity of 65535 entries
 - capacity is rounded up to the next power of 2

This queue should perform similar to [mpmc](https://github.com/brayniac/mpmc) but with a lower memory overhead. 
If memory overhead is not your main concern you should run benchmarks to decide which one to use.  

 ## Implementation details

 This implementation uses a 64 Bit atomic to store the entire state

```Text
 +63----56+55----48+47------------32+31----24+23----16+15-------------0+
 | w_done | w_pend |  write_index   | r_done | r_pend |   read_index   |
 +--------+--------+----------------+--------+--------+----------------+
```

- write_index/read_index (16bit): current read/write position in the ring buffer (head and tail).
- r_pend/w_pend (8bit): number of pending concurrent read/writes
- r_done/w_done (8bit): number of completed read/writes.

 For reading r_pend is incremented first, then the content of the ring buffer is read from memory.
 After reading is done r_done is incremented. read_index is only incremented if r_done is equal to r_pend.

 For writing first w_pend is incremented, then the content of the ring buffer is updated.
 After writing w_done is incremented. If w_done is equal to w_pend then both are set to 0 and write_index is incremented.

 In rare cases this can result in a race where multiple threads increment r_pend in turn and r_done never quite reaches r_pend.
 If r_pend == 255 or w_pend == 255 a spinloop waits it to be <255 to continue. This rarely happens in practice, that's why this is called almost lock-free.



## Dependencies

This package has no dependencies

## Usage

To use AtomicRingBuffer, add this to your `Cargo.toml`:

```toml
[dependencies]
atomicring = "0.2.0"
```


And something like this to your code

 ```rust
 
 // create an AtomicRingBuffer with capacity of 1024 elements 
 let ring = ::atomicring::AtomicRingBuffer::new(900);

// try_pop removes an element of the buffer and returns None if the buffer is empty
 assert_eq!(None, ring.try_pop());
 // push_overwrite adds an element to the buffer, overwriting the oldest element if the buffer is full: 
 ring.push_overwrite(1);
 assert_eq!(Some(1), ring.try_pop());
 assert_eq!(None, ring.try_pop());
 ```


## License

Licensed under the terms of MIT license and the Apache License (Version 2.0).

See [LICENSE-MIT](LICENSE-MIT) and [LICENSE-APACHE](LICENSE-APACHE) for details.
